# DesmosPlayer
Program the action in your Desmos graph to create animations for videos, presentations, etc.

## Introduction
When I started making short math videos using Desmos for the visuals, I would write down the sequence of actions I needed to perform on the expressions while doing a screen capture.  For example:  1) Show expression "1"; 2) Start slider for expression "1"; 3) Hide expression "1" and show expression "2"; and so on.  As my videos got longer and more involved, this became quite tedious.  If only there were a way to program those actions so it would just happen automatically.  Well, that is what DesmosPlayer will do.  You create a list of these actions, including pauses to get the timing right, and then click a button to start it running.

## Installation
Install the file desmosPlayer.user.js in your browser using your favorite script manager and make sure the installed script is enabled.  Typically (e.g. with Tampermonkey installed) this is done by clicking on the file name above, then clicking "Raw" and then "Install".  Then navigate to any Desmos calculator graph.

## Usage
To initialize the system, you will need to call the function desmosPlayer() with an array of instructions.  This can be done either by adding the call in the installed script itself, or by putting the same JavaScript code in the graph itself as a "note".  See the **Documentation** section below for complete details on how to write the instructions.  Once initialized, there will be some new buttons next to the "Save" button above the graph.  These include "Start", "Reset" and "Step" buttons, which control the execution of the instructions.

## Examples / Demos
To quickly give this a try, install the script in your browser and then visit these graphs:
Graph Link | What It Is
--- | ---
<a target="_blank" href="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/rnzfxhdzqu">MathyJaphy</a> | Animation of my YouTube channel logo, used in <a target="_blank" href="https://youtu.be/sV1NbgNodD0">this video</a>.
<a target="_blank" href="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/hslbl39gnw">Binary Counter</a> | A demonstration of how one might use labels and goto instructions.

And <a target="_blank" href="https://youtu.be/xwhbT9Do1RQ">here is a video</a> that I created using desmosPlayer.

## Documentation

### Overview

This system allows you to write a simple piece of JavaScript code that defines a program, a sequence of actions to perform on a Desmos graph.  The main element of that code is a call to the function `desmosPlayer()`.

#### desmosPlayer (\<program\>, [\{\<properties\>\}])

Parameter | Description
---- | ----
\<program\> | An array of instructions that modify expressions in a Desmos graph.
\<properties\> | (optional) An object that conveys additional configuration parameters.

This is the main function of the DesmosPlayer module.  It loads the given program and creates additional buttons in the UI for running it.
You create a program by filling an array with the results of "instruction functions" (see examples below), then pass this program
to `desmosPlayer()`, along with optional properties:

     graphTitle: A string value that has to match the title of the graph
                 in order for the system to be activated.
     allowSave:  If set to true, do not disable the "save" button after
                 the program has started.  It is normally disabled to
                 prevent accidental modification to the initial state.
     debugMode:  Set to 'true' to enable back-stepping.

### The Program

The instructions in a program array are generated by calling instruction functions.  Most of these functions take an `<id>` parameter
to indicate which expression(s) in the graph to operate on.  Each expression in a Desmos graph has a unique ID which is a string.
They are normally numeric strings, and so numeric syntax can be used instead of string syntax.  The ID
could be a non-numeric string if the expression is created by your program (see the `set()` instruction function below).

> :warning: Note: The ID is not the same as the index of the expression.

> :bulb: Tip: To find the ID of an expression, select that expression in the graph and type ctrl-Q.  The ID will be printed in the console window.

Here is an example of a program script that you would write:

```javascript
// Helpful symbolic names for expression ID's
const xPos = 139
const yPos = 140
const label = 141
const labelAngle = 144
const labelSize = 145
const val1 = 775
const val2 = 776

// Define the program
const exampleProgram = [
    show(label, 1000),
    startSlider(xPos, 1000),
    startSlider(yPos, 1000),
    startSlider(val1),
    animateValue(val2, 0, 1.5, 0.1, 0, 3000),
    stopSlider(val1),
    [startSlider(labelAngle),
     startSlider(labelSize)],
    pause(2500),
    hide(label)
]

// Load it
desmosPlayer(exampleProgram, {graphTitle: "Demo", debugMode: true});
```

There are two ways to create a program and call desmosPlayer() to load it.  One is to edit the desmosPlayer script (using your script manager's editor, for example) and insert this code somewhere within it. It can go near the top, right after the header comments.  The other is to put it in a "note" within the Desmos graph itself.  If a graph has a note with what looks like a call to `desmosPlayer()` within it, the desmosPlayer script will execute its contents as JavaScript when the graph is loaded.  If there are multiple notes with JavaScript code, only the first one will execute automatically.

> :bulb: Tip: JavaScript notes can be executed manually by selecting the expression containing the note and typing ctrl-shift-Q.  This resets the graph to its initial state and runs the code.  This makes it easy to modify the program and re-run it.

> :bulb: Tip: Desmos currently does not have a way to type a newline character into a note. To avoid putting the entire script on one line, write the code in a separate text editor and then copy/paste it into the note.

### Buttons

When desmosPlayer has been called and a program is loaded and ready to run, a "Start" button will be added next to the "Save" button.
Clicking it will start the program and turn it into a "Stop"
button.  Clicking it again will stop execution of the program.  A
"Reset" button will also appear. When clicked, it will put the graph and
the running program back to their initial states so that the program can
be run again.

> :bulb: Tip: if the save button is accidentally used
> to overwrite the original graph after the program has run, hit the
> "Reset" button and save again.
    
There is also a "Step"
button which will execute one function in the program at a time.  If
debugMode is true, then a "Back Step" button also appears after the
program has started, allowing you to undo the effect of the previous
step, all the way back to the start of the program. This is expensive
since it saves the entire graph state after every step.

### Running the Program

When the "Start" button is pressed, execution of the instructions proceeds automatically from one to the next.
The `pause()` instruction can be used to insert delays.  Also, most
instructions take an optional delay value as the final parameter which
inserts an implicit `pause()` after the instruction has run.

Instructions can be grouped together using square brackets.  Instructions
in such groupings will be run without delays and without giving Desmos a
chance to update its graph until they have all run.  This can eliminate
glitches in the animation and make it look as though the instructions ran
simultaneously.  For example:

    const testProg = [
       startSlider(1, 5000),
       [setValue(1, 0),
        setValue(2, 1.0),
        setValue(3, 2.5),
        hideLabel(3),
        showLabel(4)],
       startSlider(1, 5000)
    ]

Without the grouping, intermediate states from setting individual values and showing or hiding
individual expressions might be visible as glitches.  Delays
within the grouped commands are ignored, and `animateValue()` instructions
will go directly to the ending value.  It is an error to have a `goto()`
instruction inside a grouping.

When each instruction is executed, a message is displayed in the console
so it is possible to see what the program is doing.  When back-stepping,
the console will show the instruction that was just undone.

### Instruction Functions

    hide (<id>, [<id>, ...])
    show (<id>, [<id>, ...])
    hideLabel (<id>, [<id>, ...])
    showLabel (<id>, [<id>, ...])
    setLabel (<id>, <labelString>, [<delay>])
    setValue (<id>, <value>, [<delay>])
    startSlider (<id>, [<delay>])
    stopSlider (<id>, [<delay>])
    animateValue (<id>, <startVal>, <endVal>, <increment>, [<frameDelay>], [<delay>])
    setSliderProperties (<id>, {<properties>}, [<delay>])
    set (<id>, <properties>, [<delay>])
    stop (<messageString>)
    pause (<delay>)
    label (<labelNameString>)
    goto (<labelNameString>, [<repeatCount>])

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

**hide \(\<id\>, \[\<id\>, ...\]\)<br>
show \(\<id\>, \[\<id\>, ...\]\)<br>
hideLabel \(\<id\>, \[\<id\>, ...\]\)<br>
showLabel \(\<id\>, \[\<id\>, ...\]\)**
Parameter | Description
--- | ---
\<id\> | A comma-separated list of expression ID's

Hides or shows the expressions or labels of the expressions given as arguments to the instruction.
For `hide()` and `show()`, the ID can be for a folder as well as an individual expression.
These functions do not take an optional delay parameter like most others.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### setLabel \(\<id\>, \<labelString\>\, [\<delay\>])
Parameter | Description
--- | ---
\<id\> | The ID of an expression with a label
\<labelString\> | The desired label string
\<delay\> | (optional) Number of milliseconds to delay before next instruction

Sets the label of the given expression to the given string.
If the string uses latex, enclose the latex in back-ticks as usual.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### setValue \(\<id\>, \<value\>, \[\<delay\>\]\)
Parameter | Description
--- | ---
\<id\> | The ID of a "\<name\>=\<value\>" type of expression
\<value\> | Latex string or number of new value
\<delay\> | (optional) Number of milliseconds to delay before next instruction

Replaces the `<value>` part of the given expression with the given value.
The value can be any latex expression string or a number.  If the
expression has a slider that is playing, it will be stopped first.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### startSlider \(\<id\>, \[\<delay\>\]\)
Parameter | Description
--- | ---
\<id\> | The ID of an expression that has a slider
\<delay\> | (optional) Number of milliseconds to delay before next instruction

Equivalent to pressing the play button on a slider when it is not yet running.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### stopSlider \(\<id\>, \[\<delay\>\]\)
Parameter | Description
--- | ---
\<id\> | The ID of an expression that has a slider
\<delay\> | (optional) Number of milliseconds to delay before next instruction

Equivalent to pressing the pause button on a slider when it is already running.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### animateValue \(\<id\>, \<startVal\>, \<endVal\>, \<increment\>, \[\<frameTime\>\], \[\<delay\>\]\)
Parameter | Description
--- | ---
\<id\> | The ID of a "\<name\>=\<value\>" type of expression
\<startVal\> | The starting value for the animation
\<endVal\> | The ending value for the animation
\<interval\> | The amount to step by on each frame
\<frameTime\> | (optional) Number of milliseconds of explicit delay between frames
\<delay\> | (optional) Number of milliseconds to wait after animation is done

Animates a variable by setting its value to `startVal` and incrementing or
decrementing it by the given `interval` until it reaches `endVal`.  Speed
can be controlled by changing the `interval` and by giving a `frameTime` value.
This is similar to playing a slider, but allows explicit control over the
speed and the step size, and allows running in reverse.  The instruction
blocks until the `endVal` is reached, unlike startSlider which moves on to
the next instruction after the slider starts.  If the expression has a
slider that is playing, it will be stopped first.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### setSliderProperties \(\<id\>, \{\<properties\>\}, \[\<delay\>\]\)
Parameter | Description
--- | ---
\<id\> | The ID of an expression with a slider
\<properties\> | The properties to be set
\<delay\> | (optional) Number of milliseconds to wait before next instruction

Sets the given properties of the given slider. Only the properties that you want to change need be specified. The properties are:

    min: <latex or number>
    max: <latex or number>
    step: <latex or number>
    period: <time in milliseconds from min to max>
    loopMode: "LOOP_FORWARD_REVERSE" or
              "LOOP_FORWARD" or
              "PLAY_ONCE" or
              "PLAY_FOREVER"

For example: `setSliderProperties(val1, {min: 0, max: 10, step: 1, period: 8000, loopMode: "PLAY_ONCE"})`

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### set \(\<id\>, \{\<properties\}\>, \[\<delay\>\]\)
Parameter | Description
--- | ---
\<id\> | The ID of an expression to operate on
\<properties\> | An object containing property/value pairs
\<delay\> | (optional) Number of milliseconds to delay before next instruction

This is a generic instruction to set any property on the given expression.
See the API documentation of Calculator.setExpression to see what can
be set.  Example properties parameter:  `{label: "Hi", showLabel: true}`.

This instruction can be used to create a new expression, if the given ID does
not currently exist and the `latex` property is provided.
Note: if using this to set the `latex` property, this may not have any
effect if the expression's slider is playing (even if it is set to "PLAY_ONCE"
and has reached the maximum value).  Use stopSlider() beforehand, if necessary.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### stop \(\<messageString\>\)
Parameter | Description
--- | ---
\<messageString\> | A message to display

Causes the program to stop and display the given message string to the right of
the control buttons.  This gives the opportunity to do manual changes to
the graph.  The message can give instructions on what to do.  The program
will resume and the message will disappear when the "Start" or "Step" button is clicked.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### pause \(\<delay\>\)
Parameter | Description
--- | ---
\<delay\> | Number of milliseconds to pause

This introduces a pause of the given duration into the program.  Although
most instructions have a built-in ability to delay after running, some do not.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### label \(\<labelNameString\>\)
Parameter | Description
--- | ---
\<labelNameString\> | The name of this label

Not to be confused with a label on a graph element, this pseudo-instruction gives a name to
a point in the program which can be used in a `goto` instruction.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### goto \(\<labelNameString\>, \[\<repeatCount\>\]\)
Parameter | Description
--- | ---
\<labelNameString\> | The name of a label to jump to
\<repeatCount\> | (optional) Number of times to execute the goto before igoring it

Jumps to the specified label and decrements an internal count that
is initialized to `repeatCount`.  If the internal count
has reached zero, the count is reset to the original repeat value and
execution proceeds with the next instruction.  This allows a set of instructions
to be repeated the given number of times before moving on.  If another `goto` instruction loops back to before this one,
it will be ready to repeat again, allowing nested repeat loops to work.
To repeat indefinitely, omit the repeat count parameter or pass in a `repeatCount` of -1.

## Credits
Thanks to GitHub users @jared-hughes and @FabriceNayret for their guidance, examples and ideas for improvement.
